[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well good evening everyone
welcome to church history and theology
as we delve into uh perhaps one of the
more fascinating cities in the early
church especially when we consider uh
how little we know about certain cities
and how much we know about other ones um
I'm particularly grateful that we have
the city of Ephesus mentioned in a
fairly great detail uh quite Vivid
detail as well uh in Acts 18 and 19
which is where we're going to spend most
of our evening so you go ahead and grab
your Bibles and have them ready for that
um while I tell you a little bit about
this city uh and why it is we're going
to spend a night on it because it is one
of the most unique cities that the
church becomes found founded in Ephesus
has a very long history uh one that we
are not going to be uh working much into
but I want to really address where it is
in the first century when the church is
founded
there there's a couple reasons for this
um there's a number of cities that we're
going to be paying attention to
throughout history when Alexandria
becomes uh founded as a philosophical
Center for Christian thought we're going
to spend a whole night on that um and
then also anti Ephesus Rome of course uh
these cities play very important roles
in church history as uh as you may well
know Ephesus becomes uh the site of one
of the later ecumenical councils uh that
deals with the uh the teachings of
noorus and um and that uh that elusive
term theotokos uh being applied to Mary
happens first in this city at least is
an official Act of the institutional
Church um and so this city plays quite a
phenomenal role uh in the scriptures not
only in the book of Acts but as you well
know the uh the letter to the Ephesians
is written to this church as well as the
letters of first and 2 Timothy uh
written to one of the uh early Elders U
most likely the uh main teaching Elder
of the church in Ephesus uh a young man
named
Timothy all that to be said what things
are going on in Ephesus are extraord
ordinarily odd and they are odd to our
modern sensibilities they are odd to our
sense of um what exactly it is and what
was uh what was behind it there's a lot
of um interactions between Greeks and
Jews uh that make for a difficult
understanding uh of how exactly uh the
the nature the relationship between um
the Jewish people the Greek people and
then now we have uh the
the new uh sect of Judaism uh so it was
thought by the Romans uh that being the
Christians uh coming to town and how to
deal with that uh especially when there
was teachings that the Jews were putting
forward uh that did not seem to be in
any way consistent with the teachings
that the Christians were pting forward
um and there's animosity and uh all more
all manner of things that go on here so
it's a fascinating story and I want to
get into it uh a little bit more about
the city itself
Ephesus if you're if you're a fan of
Roman history you'll be uh you'll be
forgiven for not knowing much about
Ephesus because Roman historians hardly
ever mention the place uh at least not
in the kind of detail that uh would be
conducive to the size of the city and
the the influence that it had there's a
couple reasons for that one it is uh it
is very far away from the capital um and
it is also a part of a Asia Minor it it
has its it has its role in kind of more
of a deep Greek history uh rather than
that of Roman even though here it
obviously is part of the Roman Empire uh
Ephesus itself is not a place of
political power or Intrigue it was more
a a center of Commerce and uh a center
of um of mystical practices um as well
as for religious observance um obviously
you know if you've read the book of Acts
before the Temple of Diana or the Temple
of Artemis uh same place um is is
centered there um much of her cult was
centered there and um and so we kind of
get to see it where it is we kind of
jump straight into the center of the
story without any uh full development of
what Ephesus itself as a city is but uh
s suffice it to say that as a center of
Commerce it is an important center of
the city or a center of uh Asia Minor is
an important port um at least the the
extensions of the port itself um it is a
fascinating City in and of its own right
and certainly deserves its own uh study
for its history but that is not our
primary purpose here we are here for
church history and so I want you to see
the founding of the church and the
unique flavor it takes on and how they
interact with their previous um uh
religious practices is is certainly
something worth paying attention
to Ephesus and its culture are largely
defined by the temple there The Cult of
Artemis is the center not only of its
economy but of also um its religious
practice it is a unique cult uh it is a
unique practice that is uh very deep in
history it well predates uh the era of
the Romans um and and certainly
far back into the the times of the
Greeks there um there's there's not much
as I had said told to us from Roman
historians but uh again that has to do
with the fact that the city itself was
more a place of of commercial and
financial uh means rather than that of
political forces but it was also a place
of really strange religious practice at
least to our modern ears but even to on
the on the level of a Roman uh
experience as well Ephesus was unique um
Ephesus had as its own purpose and its
own place uh a sense of pilgrimage a
sense of purpose um kind of at the top
of the food chain as far as for uh
developed religious fervor is concerned
um when you look at a temple the the the
size and the the the the kind of Temple
that was built there you can see that
something quite unique is going on in
this city in fact the temple of emis
here in Ephesus is considered one of the
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World it
was simply
enormous and uh so was the city the city
itself was not small uh we can estimate
based on the size of its Amphitheater
that can seat about 25,000 people um
usually we can estimate that the size of
a city is 10 times the size of the
capacity of its Amphitheater that's a
very broad uh stroke but it gives us an
idea of a city of a quarter of a million
people which in the first century is
enormous absolutely enormous um and so
when we when we deal with this city we
are not dealing with a small town city
we are not dealing with something off
the beaten path we are dealing with
something that is centrally important to
the entire area of Asia Minor it is one
of the reasons I expect that Paul spends
more time in Ephesus establishing the
church there than any other city and
that includes
Corinth Corinth is a center for its own
purposes uh commercial as well as
religious um but uh Paul spends 18
months in Corinth he spends twice as
long almost in Ephesus and he writes a
lot to both of these cities uh Corinth
might be an interesting one to spend an
evening on but uh that's more of a a
Biblical study than is a church history
study you know 1 and 2 Corinthians and
all
um so let's delve into this a little bit
deeper what are the odd goings on in
Ephesus well if you've read the story
before you're familiar uh with some of
it um but there's there's a lot more
history to it there was exorcisms for
higher that were going on uh you had
spellcasting
incantations um you had certain types of
incenses that were used for
exorcisms um when I say things like uh
magical and mystical Arts I truly mean
it amulets bracelets rings necklaces
that were all devoted to these magical
practices and something was unique about
the city of Ephesus in that these things
were actually going
on now we live in the modern world where
we where we you know look down our nose
at the ancient world and say ah they
those those people believed everything
was magic those people believed in
mysticism you know behind every leaf and
behind every corner well that's not
entirely true and they were able to
distinguish in places where these things
were going on we know very well uh at
least let's keep it to exorcisms itself
exorcisms were going on for centuries at
this point trying to deal with the uh
influx
of for instance uh the influx of evil
spirits into people possessing them
this is a this is something that doesn't
occur in the Old Testament if you ever
noticed it's it's a practice or it's
it's a a reality that cropped up in the
inter testamental period and we have
references especially to Jewish
incantations and exorcists that use all
sorts of ways to try to exercise these
demons out of people whether it is using
foul smelling types of uh incense or it
is using certain names or incantations
or um or magical sayings there was all
manner of ways to deal with these things
um potions and and don't hear Harry
Potter so much as desperation to affect
the spiritual World using some kind of
physical means or words spoken um it was
it was more of a a a dealing with things
we do not fully grasp and yet every once
in a while something works so we write
that down and see if it works again in
the future um it was is a very Hit or
Miss Thing uh Jesus himself by the way
uh makes reference in the gospels to uh
the sons of the Pharisees um doing
exorcisms and being successful in
certain situations and uh I think a lot
of us read over that a little too quick
um but these things certainly were
happening
and the evidence that unbelievers were
able to do certain exorcisms only
deepens the respect for what we see
Jesus doing in the New Testament and the
Apostles doing after his time Jesus was
not every once in a while trying uh a
different incantation and sometimes
being successful no he simply commands
demons to
leave and they are required to obey him
that is unheard of in any of these
mystical practices in any of these um
IST descriptions that we have it's
always trying something new see if it
works maybe if we make this certain
sound or we invoke this particular name
or if we uh burn this type of incense or
maybe if we maybe this demon just hates
the smell of dead fish so we're going to
try that one like there's always this
desperation to affect the spiritual
realm using things that are within the
physical
world and that's why you have all manner
of jewelry and ambulance and things like
this trying to do this well that was
what was so unique about Jesus and the
apostles they were not using spells or
incantations or tricks or amulets they
were just coming in and commanding
demons it is what the apostles came back
to Jesus and they were so overwhelmed
about the demons listen to US based on
who you are and you know Jesus reminds
them that you know that's not the point
of of um um rejoicing the point of
rejoicing is that the name your names
are recorded in heaven that's what's
truly astounding about all of this is
that you are saved and that really
affects the apostles to a really deep
Point um and you see you see things
happening that always occur side by side
with this and that is that everywhere
there's practices odd the spirit of the
Lord will show up in odder
ways and it's it's kind of one of these
things that I I love to point out every
time I teach on the holy spirit is that
he loves to outdo people in their own
game and he saves the most extraordinary
things that he does here I'm speaking of
the Holy Spirit he saves the most
extraordinary things that he does for
unique circumstances and cities like
Ephesus and you'll see it here in the
text um once we get into this in Ephesus
again they are believing that they can
manipulate the spiritual and
Supernatural powers in the world through
magical words incantations names and
things like this um and um but I will
point of note these types of things were
not used for it best as we can construct
of of healings of those who are sick
that was left to more natural remedies
and uh and and ways to fix them you know
whatever medicine they had at the time
but as far as for affecting the
spiritual World especially with
exorcisms that would be one of the main
ways that this shows up you may look at
that and go you know what how
significant is this well I want to
introduce this to you by just showing
you straight in the scriptures um at
church history and theology we always
put forward the scriptures are the most
authoritative record of anything that we
have uh not simply because it's right
but because it is the very word of God
and we have this story told in such
detail and so it really does uh it
really does behoove us to read it and so
I want you to go ahead and grab your
Bibles or if you are um watching the
video version of this I have it up on
the screen for you we're going to start
in Acts chapter
18 verse
18 now Paul and Priscilla and Aquilla
have been in Corinth and uh and they are
leaving Corinth and then going to uh
going to Ephesus and so that's kind of
where we pick up the story here um if
you want the timeline of this it's not
that important for our purposes here but
early 50s maybe 51
52 Verse 18 in Acts 18 says this after
this Paul stayed many days longer and
took leave of the brothers and set sail
for Syria and with him Priscilla and
Aquilla now again Priscilla and Aquilla
if you recall had been uh dismissed from
Rome uh by the the emperor's order uh
that that took place and uh in history
and we can pinpoint exactly when that is
and they went to Corinth and they met up
with Paul there and they helped and
aided one another um and then the three
of them left for uh Ephesus right verse
19 says they came when they came to
Ephesus uh Paul left them there but he
himself went into the synagogue and
reasoned with the Jews now this is going
to be the beginning of uh quite an
interesting stir up between uh Paul and
the Jews and and the silver smith and
all sorts of things this is like a whole
uh whole novel story that goes on here
um this was always Paul's habit he
wanted to go to the synagogue start on
familiar territory we both hold to the
authority of the Old Testament reasoning
with them regarding Jesus as the Messiah
this was always his habit uh and with
good reason as well uh any Old Testament
Saints would be able to hear the message
about Jesus of Nazareth
uh and the and the Fulfillment of uh the
prophecies and follow the way uh follow
Christ and so he began there and um and
began there as his normal habit anywhere
uh verse 20 says when they asked him to
stay for a longer period he declined
really unusual thing but on taking leave
of them he says I will return to you
again if God wills and he sets sail from
Ephesus now he leaves Priscilla and
Aquilla behind right priscila and
aquillo were both uh very capable of of
managing this uh this new effort in the
city of Ephesus uh and and in taking
this on but for reasons we are not uh
given Paul leaves from Ephesus and he
goes to cesaria down to Antioch and uh
and so forth and then comes back through
galatian friia uh again strengthening
all the disciples going through the
entire area uh verse 24 uh we get this
little Side Story
uh while um while Priscilla and Aquilla
are in Ephesus and Paul is not there and
that is we are introduced to a Jew named
Apollos Apollos was a native of
Alexandria and he came to Ephesus now
this is a fascinating man uh because he
is quite well Adept at the Old Testament
and one of the things that we know about
the the uh the ministry of Paul and a
Priscilla and Aquilla is that they are
able to work in that sphere of of the
the clarity of the Old Testament showing
forward who Jesus of Nazareth came to be
in fulfillment of the scriptures and so
Apollos who was a native of Alexandria
came to Ephesus now this is a
interesting side note as it is the
founding of the church in Alexandria we
know basically nothing about in any
Clarity um Alexandria itself as far as
the city there's tradition that holds
that the uh the Apostle or the the um
that one of the early leaders of the
church Mark uh founded the church there
that's a later tradition it's kind of
hard to establish that as a historical
reality more than it is a tradition um
there's all sorts of cities that try to
claim one of the Apostles or one of the
guys mentioned in scripture founded
their Church to give them you know some
level of legitimacy um but as far as for
what we know this is the first place
that we see it cropping
up and here's one of the confusing Parts
about
it apollis seems to have been sent out
or grown up or trained or come to a come
to a uh the instruction of the way of
the Lord come to Salvation in Alexandria
and he is very confused about how things
work uh with regards to the scriptures
and uh and the new and the the message
of Jesus of Nazareth right uh look at
this story here at the end of verse 24
he was an eloquent man competent in the
scriptures he had been instructed in the
way of the Lord and being fervent in
spirit he spoke and taught accurately of
things concerning Jesus though he knew
only the baptism of John he began to
speak boldly in the synagogue but when
Priscilla and Aquilla heard him they
took him aside and explained to him the
way of God more
accurately and when he wished to cross
over to AA that is the area of Corinth
uh the brothers encouraged him and wrote
to the disciples to welcome him when he
arrived he greatly helped those who
through Grace had believed for he
powerfully refuted the Jews in public
showing by the scriptures that the
Christ was Jesus now Apollos is not our
main focus here but it's fascinating
that he leaves from Alexandria and comes
to Ephesus um but
Alexandria where he comes from though he
is uh competent in the Old Testament
scriptures he and has the spirit of God
and is introduced to the way um of the
lord it's done so through the baptism of
John now this is not the only time that
this is going to show up we're going to
see it right here in the very next
passage um his knowledge or the clarity
of the way with regards to the latter
Ministry of Jesus Christ is not as well
known to him uh he seems to have taken
from the baptism of John this baptism of
repentance and the clarity that came
with the Fulfillment of the Old
Testament found in the person of Jesus
of
Nazareth whether he knew fully about the
resurrection uh and the death burial and
Resurrection the Ascension of Jesus
Christ and the coming of the Holy Spirit
or what exactly he was off on we don't
really know um but that he was reasoning
with the Jews means that he was
expressing to them the Fulfillment of
the Messianic uh Kingdom had been found
in Jesus of Nazareth and how much he had
developed after that or how much he had
known after that seems that it wasn't
much which doesn't speak very well of an
established church in Alexandria at this
time so it's it's an important side note
to make uh as you pass over this
especially since he knew only of the
baptism of John which means as far as
for uh his uh understanding of things
that were later going on um he wasn't
aware of anything that has happened in
the book of Acts so
far because if he was only aware the
baptism of John the baptism of everyone
on the day of Pentecost or the baptisms
of Cornelius or the the the Council of
Jerusalem that had been held before not
none of these things were known to him
and so it is fascinating to see his
Clarity of things basically as an Old
Testament Saint uh and here knowing
uh only the baptism of John he is not
the only one by the way in Ephesus uh
for this now this is this is a
fascinating thing too so watch Watch
What Happens um uh he Apollos had began
to speak boldly in the synagogue this
verse 26 Priscilla and Aquilla heard him
they took him aside and explained to him
the way of God more accurately
again this means Priscilla and Aquilla
are taking over where Paul was they go
to the synagogue they engage in the
discussions there and then apollis comes
there and informs and is teaching and
they pull him aside and say yeah you are
correct Jesus is the Messiah but let me
show you the rest of the story that has
been going on what is the way of God
more
accurately um and then Apollos with all
this fervor you desires to cross over to
Corinth and continue on basically he
seems to be an itinerate preacher of
some type that uh that carries on the
same kind of ministry that Paul has been
doing and going into the synagogue
reasoning with the Jews that Christ is
Jesus and and using the scriptures to do
so um and it says he powerfully refuted
the Jews in public regarding this
um and here we pick up the story um in
chapter 19 ver1 and this is probably one
of the more fascinating chapters of all
of scripture uh just watch this it
happened that while Apollos was at
Corinth Paul passed through the Inland
country and came to Ephesus so get the
picture Apollos left uh Ephesus he goes
to Corinth Paul comes now to Ephesus and
there he found some
disciples and he said to them did you
receive the Holy Spirit when you
believed and they said no we have not
even heard that there is a Holy Spirit
and he said into what then were you
baptized and they said into John's
baptism and Paul said John baptized with
the baptism of repentance telling the
people to believe in the one who was to
come after him that is Jesus on hearing
this they were baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus and when Paul had laid
his hands on them the Holy Spirit came
on them and they began speaking in
tongues and prophesying there were about
12 men in all
now before we move on this is a very
unique story very unique setting and
situation um what things are going on
here are not typical in any way
whatsoever um they are odd and bizarre
but it is one of these things that is
fascinating because we have two stories
back to back apollis had never heard of
uh the the latter or more clear aspects
of the ministry of Jesus Christ and
these and and had been baptized after
the baptism of John and these 12 men
have almost the same story except they
even go back further still only into the
baptism of John a baptism repentance but
didn't even know about
Jesus um or the Holy Spirit they were uh
Very Old Testament Saints if you will uh
like the very last ones and so I always
find this fascinating because um how the
book of Acts is laid out really shows
this this triumphal March of the Gospel
uh and it uses this terminology uh all
throughout of from Jerusalem to Judea to
Samaria to the uttermost parts of the
world and we have all of these instances
of of the Holy Spirit and the gospel
coming to each of these places obviously
Jerusalem starts in Acts chapter 2 at
the day of Pentecost and Judea uh and
Samaria you have in the following
chapters with uh with the preaching of
people like Steven and Phillip and the
uh and the preaching of uh Peter to
Cornelius uh
you know in in uh uttermost parts of the
world now we start seeing uh the Holy
Spirit and the gospel being preached now
in Ephesus this is actually the last
time we have something like this where
somebody had no idea that there was a
Holy Spirit and then all of a sudden
baptism in Jesus's name uh they are
baptized the Holy Spirit comes on them
and you have like a whole another round
of the day of Pentecost yet again just
like with
Cornelius um it's it's really one of
these these fascinating aspects here uh
every time I teach on the nature of the
Holy Spirit and come to this section
it's always quite a a fascinating
fulfillment of what has been going on um
but here we have in
Ephesus these men it seems that are are
Jews that have uh followed into John's
baptism and were not familiar yet that
everything that John was preaching had
come P come to pass now you you got to
really appreciate how late this is uh
this is 25 years after the crucifixion
of Jesus nearly 30 years after the
ministry of John had died with his um or
or had had ended with his premature
death um so you're talking in a very
isolated group of of people um but
that's not hard to imagine either um
again the church in Ephesus had not been
founded yet and so the preaching of
Jesus of Nazareth had only just begun um
and the hearing of these things this is
the whole reason why Paul is on these
missionary Journeys it's again the whole
reason why Apollos is on these
missionary Journeys is to extend out the
preaching that Jesus of Nazareth is the
Christ and has come into the world now
the great thing is that even though
apollis is preaching this people like
Priscilla and Aquilla people like Paul
are there to help clarify and to uh to
move forward on on how these things have
uh actually come into the world and the
Fulfillment of all of this um it's
actually probably in passing more
fascinating that Apollos had the spirit
of God and uh and um uh yeah that's uh
even without knowledge it seems of the
death burial and resurrection of Jesus
um which is even more fascinating and
brings up more questions but ones that
are for another
time Paul after speaking to these 12 men
uh enters the synagogue
and for three months he spoke boldly
reasoning and persuading them about the
kingdom of God now this would be a
shorthand for the entire message of
Jesus's own Ministry and his death
burial and resurrection and the kingdom
of God that has come into the world not
a kingdom made with hands etc etc so
basically the entirety of the Gospel um
you know just as Jes is Jesus had said
Mark what is it
1:15 uh that says that Jesus went about
preaching the king om of Heaven uh that
it was at hand and therefore everyone is
to repent and believe in the
gospel
but Paul runs into the same
problems when some that were in the
synagogue became stubborn and continued
on in unbelief speaking evil of the way
that is the terminology of U of me
Christians speaking evil of the way
before the congregation Paul withdrew
from them and took the disciples with
him reasoning daily in the Hall of
tyrannus uh this continued for 2 years
so that all the residents of Asia heard
the word of the Lord both Jews and
Greeks now the Hall of tyrannus we don't
know exactly what it is um but there
there does seem to be that it was
related some type of uh trade hall or
some type of learning Hall um school
perhaps um regardless of such the the
entire perspective of this is that it
was a place where uh you could could sit
and discuss things it would be similar
to uh the uh the marketplace on the the
areopagus um or or the Agora or places
like this in Athens where Paul would
frequently sit down and just discuss
things with people um you see this in
previous sections in various Greek
cities this was a very um a very common
practice and um certainly here present
uh apparently at the hall of tyrannis
um in the uh in the city of Ephesus now
here we start to run into uh the reality
that uh not only is it continue for two
years but that all the residents of Asia
heard the word of the Lord both Jews and
Greeks now this shows you kind of the
Cosmopolitan nature of Ephesus it is a
trading Hub it is a place where people
come from all over the place and uh and
here we actually see it uh spelled out
for us now we see one of the problems
that arises uh with all of this uh one
of the problems that arises um in the
middle of all of this is that God was
specifically choosing during those two
years to do something
unique and that is to respond to this
culture this culture that knew very well
the details of spiritual magic and power
and this this city that knew very well
uh uh the the power of amulets and
things like this were
small the the power of these things was
it was like it increased the chances of
mystical things happening nothing was a
certainty on any level whatsoever it's
not like you could say here's an amulet
that always takes care of this type of
demon these magical Arts these mystical
books these incantations were an
increasing of the chances of the
likelihood that you could actually
exercise a demon for instance uh or um
or so forth you don't have any real
indication that that um that magical
arts in Ephesus were being used in the
place of medicine for health needs and
so you see God actually one uping this
which is really fascinating Watch What
Happens um in Acts Chapter 19 Verse 11
we're introduced to this God was doing
extraordinary Miracles by the hands of
Paul in Ephesus so that even
handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched
his skin were carried away to the sick
and their diseases left them and the
evil spirits came out of them now I'm
going to stop right there this is not in
any way typical normative
or to be expected this is not a
prescription for how you do worship this
is not a prescription for how you you do
missionary Endeavors this was
odd and there's a reason it's odd and
that is because Ephesus was odd and God
was approaching them where they are I I
think it's always this fascinating thing
where where Jesus for instance comes and
he he interacts with the Pharisees on
the very thing that they boast in and
that is their righteousness and so he
layer focuses on that in Ephesus it was
their mystical Arts it was their power
of exorcisms it was their their very
unusual and odd way of carrying about
the mystical practices uh of of
religious devotion in their town and so
God Saves these unique in fact he uses
the term extraordinary very uh beyond
the normal of Miracles now Miracles
themselves are extraordinary but to to
add layers to this these are miraculous
mirac mirales these are unusual Miracles
these are extraordinary Mir Miracles
done by the hands of Paul and we don't
see things like this in scripture really
anywhere else where a handkerchief or an
apron that had brushed up against
Paul able to be carried away to the sick
and then they are healed and the demons
are
exercised these are not magical objects
this is the holy spirit making clear
that the message of Paul that he is
bringing to this city is stronger and
better and more powerful than any of the
mystical Arts that the Temple of Diana
or the Temple of the of Artemis or any
of the amulets or bracelets or magical
arts or books had for
you I personally believe it is because
of the depth of the magical Arts being
practiced in emphasis that God
specifically saved these miracles for
this
time now could this have blown out of
the water any other culture uh with
these kinds of Miracles yeah absolutely
but it would have been
Overkill here this is showing that there
are powerful
things that Paul is
preaching that Paul is carrying on now
there was all manner of other uh
instances uh where Miracles had happened
in in in uh alignment with the apostles
preaching but here this kind of idea
that that just a handkerchief or an
apron that brushed across his skin could
be carried away like this is very
unusual um a very powerful work through
the Holy Spirit uh in the ministry of
Paul and of course this kind
of comes in and messes up people's
economy if you can carry away a
handkerchief or an apron that had
brushed against Paul and it can exercise
a
demon uh what do you think that's going
to do for those whose job it is to
exercise demons look at verse 13 then
some of the itinerate Jewish
exorcists undertook to invoke the name
of the Lord Jesus over those who had
evil spirits saying I adure you by the
Jesus whom Paul proclaims
now before we get into it one of the
funnier stories in the book of Acts um
that is like scary funny um first of all
notice in Ephesus we have itinerate
Jewish exorcists these are these are
those who whose job or or Pastime or
devotion if you will is is carrying out
the Deliverance of evil spirits now
notice how open-minded they are to use
any incantation that could possibly Work
O I heard that the Lord Jesus uh whom
Paul pre preaches um Paul is able to
exercise that great write it down put it
down let's use that as an
incantation and so they make their own
incantation and here we have one right
in scripture here uh and then they they
uh they uh undertook to invoke the name
of the Lord Jesus and so they try it
they're just like well let's try a new
one it seems to work all the time for
Paul uh it seems to even work with his
handkerchiefs and his aprons so let's go
out and use this as an incantation and
look at this incantation right here they
they walk up to they walk up to somebody
who has a demon and then they just try
it out I adure you by the Jesus whom
Paul
proclaims verse 14 says seven sons of a
Jewish high priest named ska were doing
this they were trying to take these new
incantation in Jesus's names uh even in
Paul's names basically again back to
desperation to use anything that works
very pragmatic very desperate very
reaching but something surprising
happens to them verse 15 the evil spirit
answered them let me put it back on the
screen the evil spirit answered
them and said Jesus I know and Paul I
recognize but who are
you and the man in whom was the evil
spirit uh leaped on them mastered all of
them and overpowered them so that they
fled out of the house naked and
wounded and this became known to all the
residents of Ephesus both Jews and
Greeks and fear fell upon them all and
the name of the Lord Jesus was extolled
now there's there's multiple things
happening here at the same time the idea
that fear fell upon them all shows again
the side of desperation of
exorcisms uh here these are seven sons
of a Jewish high priest
the they're not able to exercise these
demons who will be able to um and so the
almost in desperation people began
searching for something that works well
what has worked it's obvious from the
incantation that these seven sons of the
high priest try that
Paul and the Lord Jesus whom Paul is
preaching is one of the ways in
desperation you can go and find some
solution to this now that there was that
many exorcisms needed in emphasis shows
most likely this was a place of
destination if you had a demon
possession you went to Ephesus to try to
get it dealt with and they would try any
number of ways to do it that would be
the only way that you could pull off
something like this uh in a city of this
size unless you are imagining that every
10th person is uh you know uh infected
by a demon uh there'd have to be some
kind of con influx of this going on in
this culture and that certainly seems to
be the
case this became uh all of this became
known to all the residents of Ephesus
both Jews and Greeks and fear fell upon
them all the name of the Lord Jesus was
extolled also many of those who were now
Believers came confessing and divulging
their practices and a number of those
who had practiced magical Arts brought
their books together and burned them in
the sight of all they counted the value
of them and found it came to 50,000
pieces of silver so the word of the Lord
continued to increase and Prevail
mightily now this is a fascinating story
and it shows us kind of the the depth of
what has been going on here um you have
magical Arts just above those Jews and
Greeks who have
repented and and confess their sins and
come to Christ they are able to produce
among their own possessions
books magical
Arts amulets whatever the case may be
that they were using bring it all
together and burn them in the middle of
the
city now I want to Simply point out they
did not go up to a library and empty it
all out this is not this is not coming
in and you know just huge book burning
this is burning their own books which
means those who used to be Christians
used to practice these magical artarts
used to do these
things that's a tremendous amount of
books spells Etc that are in these
things they counted the volume of them
found it the value of them and found to
came to 50,000 pieces of silver um
that's millions of
dollars millions of dollars this is what
was personally owned by the people in
the Church of Ephesus by the end of this
ministry what's more fascinating about
this is that they are not selling them
they do not want to encouraged it is not
that they look at that and go oh this is
just a bunch of fairy tales they look at
that and say this is
dangerous I think it's one of those
things that really should stand in our
own
way of of interpreting this is that we
actually give respect to what they knew
and we only know by their testimony they
saw it as dangerous they saw it as
sinful they saw it as something that
should not be part of the life of the
church or part of the unconfessed memory
of the church this should be confessed
this should be divulged this should be
eradicated it shouldn't be kept around
as though it's just a mere trinket or if
it's just just a a a you know a mere
fictional thing they saw it as real they
saw it as damaging they saw it as
spiritually
dangerous uh I for one I'm going to take
their word for it uh they seem to know a
whole lot more about it than any of
us well the story in Ephesus continues
and it shows us yet another part of this
mystical culture in this city now after
these events verse 21 here Acts 19 after
these events Paul resolved in the spirit
to pass through Macedonia and AA and go
to Jerusalem saying after I have been
there I must also see
Rome and having sent into Macedonia two
of his helpers Timothy and arus he
himself stayed in Asia for a while about
that time there arose no little
disturbance concerning the way for a man
named Demetrius silver smith who made
silver shrines to aremis brought no
little business to the Craftsmen these
he gathered together with the workmen of
similar trades and said men you know
that from this business we have our
wealth again very central part to the
Commerce in Ephesus uh is the worship of
Artemis as we're about to find out and
you see and hear that only that not only
in Ephesus but in almost all of Asia
this Paul has persuaded and turned away
a great many people saying that God's
made with hands are not gods and there
is danger not only that this trade of
ours may come into disrepute but also
that the Temple of the great goddess
Artemis may be counted as nothing and
that she may be even deposed from her
magnificence she whom all Asia in the
world
worship when the crowd heard this they
were enraged and were crying out great
as Artemis of the Ephesians and so the
city was filled with confusion and they
rushed together into the theater
dragging within hang on a second
so the centrality of what is going on
here really has to do with the localized
cult so we get the uh the broader
culture of mystical and magical Arts
exorcisms and all these things that are
going on in Ephesus and now we kind of
zoom in and see what is the local
uh what is the what is the small locus
of all of this and that is the emis cult
uh there in Ephesus now if you want to
know how significant this is a
description of the Temple of Artemis
might actually be
because uh as I mentioned before it is
considered one of the Seven Wonders of
the Ancient World this is no small thing
uh the Temple of
Artemis uh is described actually by plyy
and uh in his natural history book 36 uh
chapter 21 as uh in in one of the
Renditions um I want you to I want you
to just hear this so I'm going to read
it for you uh I'm not going to have this
on the screen um but I will I'll just
read it out for you um here py the Elder
describes the nature and the appearance
and the building of the Temple of
Artemis he says in chapter 21 natural
history book
36 the most wonderful Monument of
Grecian magnificence the one that merits
our genuine admiration is the Temple of
Diana Artemis at Ephesus which took
120 years to build a work in which all
all Asia joined in a marshy soil was
selected for its sight in order that it
might not suffer from earthquakes or the
chasms that they produce on the other
hand again that the foundations of so
vast a pile might not have to rest upon
a loose and shifting bed layers of
trotten charcoal were placed beneath it
with fleeces covered with wool upon the
top of them the entire length of the
temple is
425 ft and the breadth 220 5 The Columns
are 127 in number and 60 ft in height
each of them presented by a different
King 36 of these columns were carved and
one of them by the hand of uh and one of
them by the hand of
scopus um uh cherish chaffron was the
architect who presided over the work the
great Marvel in this building is how
much ponderous uh architraves could
possibly have been raised to such a
great height
uh this however the architect affected
by means of bags filled with sand which
He piled upon uh up upon an inclined
plane until they reached beyond the
capitals of the columns then as he
gradually emptied the L uh the lower
bags the architraves sensibly are
insensibly settled in the places
assigned to them but the greatest
difficulty of all was found in laying
the lentil which he had placed over the
entrance doors it was an enormous mass
of stone and by no possibility could it
be brought to line high level upon the
jams which formed its bed in consequence
of which the architect was driven to
such a state of anxiety and Desperation
is to contemplate suicide wearied and
quite worn out by such thoughts as these
during the night they say that he beheld
in a dream the goddess in honor of whom
the temple was being erected who ex who
exhorted him to live on for that she
herself had placed the stone in its
proper position and such in fact the
next morning it was found to be the case
that the stone apparently having come to
the proper level by Dent of its own
weight the other decorations of this
work would suffice to fill many volumes
but they do not tend in any way to
illustrate the works of Nature and so
plyy ends his
description the Temple of Artemis is
simply enormous um and it is imposing
and the idea that the entire city could
come together and with one voice uh
Express how confident they are in their
city in the responsibility that they are
given to taking care of her Temple uh
the great goddess Artemis um and and to
to be even brought to a flurry like this
or even a riot like this by Demetrius a
silver smith uh saying that it's
possible that our Temple the Temple of
the great Godus aremis may be counted as
nothing if this kind of preaching
continues on
again the Center of these practices is
found here at this and it would be an
absolutely imposing thing to be able to
see what is going on in this
city uh again they all come together
they're in the theater as we're about to
see when they heard this this is verse
28 they were enraged and crying out
great is Artemis of the Ephesians so the
city was filled with confusion and they
rushed together into the theater again
this is a theater that we have actually
um dug up they drug with them G and
aristarchus macedonians who were Paul's
companions in travel when Paul wished to
go in among the crowd the disciples
would not let him and even some of the
asars uh who were friends of his sent to
him and were urging him not to venture
into the theater basically there was a
riot they are going to kill you uh if
you can do this now uh verse 22 or verse
32 shows how difficult this is now some
cried out one thing some another for the
assembly was in confusion and most of
them did not know why they had all come
together some of the crowd prompted
Alexander whom the Jews had put forward
and Alexander motioning with his hand
wanting to make a defense to the crowd
again it seems Alexander U one of the
Jews here um possibly of the synagogue
possibly not a Believer uh but wanting
to make a distinction between Jews and
Christians uh here basically don't don't
be angry with us uh we're we're just
fine living here um but uh you can see
this even coming up this this problem
that the Greeks had with the Jews as
well verse 34 when they recognized that
he was a Jew for about 2 hours they all
just cried out with one voice great as
emis of the
Ephesians um that's
a that's quite a
riot but the town clerk had to quiet
down the crowd at the end of these two
hours right he says men of the men of
Ephesus who is there who does not know
that the city of the Ephesians is Temple
Keeper of the great Artemis and of the
sacred stone that fell from the sky now
let me stop there for just a second
there have been a lot of people that
tried to piece back together what in the
world this is talking about maybe it's a
meteorite and something like this there
are many instances uh in in Greek
history where the stories of a statue or
a sacred stone falling out of the sky
for a specific local uh uh Temple cult
um are all of these true probably not
are some of them true probably so
uh now does that mean that we're talking
about um you know meteorites or
something you know something like this
no I find that description a little bit
too um not reminiscent of some of the
stories uh some of them seem to indicate
that they had full-on statues their own
Idols fall out of the sky um it does
seem to be that that is certainly in
some cases the case um then in others
you just have an idol that's made and
say this one also fell from the sky that
absolutely would happen too um about
this one particular we don't know uh we
don't know exactly what's going on here
as far as uh what we're looking at but
it does seem to be some kind of sacred
stone that fell from the sky that was
used either in uh next to or part of uh
the main Idol of Artemis inside the
temple and regardless of what exactly it
is what they thought themselves
possessors of is even more
significant
um uh here uh the town clerk uh
continues on verse 36 seeing then that
these things cannot be denied you ought
to be quiet and do nothing rash for you
have brought these men here who are
neither sacrilegious nor blasphemers of
our goddess if therefore Demetrius and
the craftsmen who with him have a
complaint against anyone the courts are
open and there are pro councils let them
bring charges against one another but if
you seek anything further it shall be
settled in the assembly for we are
really in danger of being charged with
rioting today since there is no cause
that we can give to justify this
commotion when he had said these things
he dismissed the
assembly after the Uproar ceased Paul
sent for the disciples and after
encouraging them he said farewell and
departed from Macedonia now this whole
story what do we what do we start to
learn about oh sorry not having that on
the screen uh for that this whole story
what do we what do we learn about all of
this wear learn that in the stories uh
that come out of the city of Ephesus
that the city itself is unique for its
mystical and magical Arts it is unique
for its uh its Clarity of its own
practices it is unique for I think
really the depth of its own practices
things that I think are
modernized um you know we kind of pass
over but the scriptures are very clear
that there were all manner of sorceress
acts that go on in the ancient world
especially before uh the 2 century and
and and Beyond into ancient history um
you see things like the
Egyptian um uh Mystics Sorcerers that
were able to in some ways um uh mimic
the the plagues of Egypt uh you see
things that are happening inside the
Babylonian Empire and the Persian Empire
and the Grecian Empires that really
start to call into question our our
simplistic believe modernist
interpretation of things um there was a
great and deep respect uh knowing that
there was an increase of of let's just
stick with the text here an increase of
spiritual attacks that were going on
that seemed to be all surrounding the
Incarnation of Jesus as some way that
that um demonic possessions were a way
of imitating uh the Incarnation similar
to how the Egyptian Sorcerers were
imitating uh the plagues of uh of the
god of Israel upon them uh this again
trying to uh dilute and to discredit uh
the greater claims of what Jesus of
Nazareth was coming to do but here Jesus
shows H and the Holy Spirit in uh in
full Accord shows that the power of the
gospel and of the Cross is far greater
than any of this stuff right I think
about the desperation uh and this this I
want to kind of settle your minds on
think about the desperation of what we
learn of this culture in trying to
affect the spiritual realm with things
that we can do uh and what do we learn
in the gospel the only thing that you
can affect in the spiritual world is an
encouragement of evil practices you
can't actually in the gospel uh
accomplish things that that fix the
spiritual condition this must come from
the spirit of God it must come from
Christ Jesus himself it must come from
the
Father the god of Israel has not allowed
his people to be left to wonder how all
these things but he has truly sent his
Messiah he sent his Spirit into the
world and now this announcement is being
made in one of the as as one author has
called Ephesus the center of magic in
the ancient
world and to to to see that the Holy
Spirit saves up the most extraordinary
miracle Les for this city to be able to
right where it hurts pin prick this
entire cult to be able to to interact
with it on levels that it tried to reach
but never could really is indicative I
believe of the Christians discipline in
the world as we come to Christ we we
tend to have a more naive concept about
how much we can accomplish and yet we
start to see that the more years we walk
with the Lord more we realize that it is
him doing these things not us that is
him accomplishing our spiritual growth
not us and I find the story of Ephesus
just overwhelmingly fascinating not only
does it challenge some of my
preconceived modernist Notions and
really show us that the world I think is
far more complicated and spiritual in
the ancient world than we ever really
give give it credit for but further than
that we see that God did not leave the
world without spiritual remedy he didn't
give us spells and incantations and
amulets and all of these types of things
uh he gave the the high priest the urum
and the thumim that God specifically
promised to work through uh until it was
no longer the case uh we are given uh
certain aspects in the old Covenant
where the casting of lots was a
legitimate way to determine the will of
God based on providential plannings of
how basically everything uh works out
but here in the New Covenant the spirit
of God plays Central role and he is not
in any way intimidated
by the uh Cult of
emis I want you to bring to your
minds here at the close here how it is
Paul talks to the church in Ephesus when
he writes his book of the to the
Ephesians when he writes to them he
speaks to them of what is given to us in
Christ what what inheritance is ours
because we're United with the head that
is Christ what has been given to us who
once were dead in trespasses and sins
God has made
alive it is not that he has just healed
us of our diseases he has actually
brought us to spiritual life from
spiritual
death he has set our feet upon the rock
he has by Grace saved us through faith
none of it is of our own
doing he
took Greeks who were once far off this
is just Ephesians 2 and brought them
near by the blood of Christ he has not
left the church leaderless he has not
left it without purpose he has left
leaders in place to through the
scriptures equip the Saints for the work
of the ministry until we all grow up to
the maturity of Christ he has told us
about how our lives change how we submit
to one another out of the fear and
reverence for the Lord he has told us in
so many different ways imitate
God don't just imitate those who think
they know something about God and think
they have gained some way of tricking
God into giving them money or tricking
the spiritual Realms into doing this or
that legalism is just as empty as
that you are not going to trick God into
giving you more grace you cannot do that
through incantations or multiple prayers
or any of these types of things I'm
sorry those practices are not biblical
what is biblical is a dependence upon
Christ no matter the
situation it is the grace of God that is
able to train Us in godliness as Paul
tells to
Titus I find the church in Ephesus
fascinating I find it fascinating that a
lot of these practices
eventually died away uh with the influx
of Christianity it did not fully die
away we're going to see um how the
church in Ephesus uh is around in the uh
in the early fth Century um during the
uh during the Council of Ephesus and
perhaps some of its cultural memories uh
at play in the in the calls in the way
some of the things were structured there
we'll talk about that when we get there
um but with that I'm going to leave you
uh with these thoughts regarding the the
church in Ephesus and the the hope of
the Gospel that is far stronger than
anything this world can produce with
that may the Lord bless you all
[Music]
[Applause]